Port 10412 automating self service actions approvals guides (#1658)
port-labs/port-docs: docs/guides/all/automatically-approve-action-using-automation.md

---
displayed_sidebar: null
title: Automating self service action approval
description: Learn how to set up automated approvals for self service actions, improving efficiency and reducing manual overhead.
---

# Automating self service action approvals

In this guide, we will walk you through the process of setting up an automated approval system for self service actions. We will use a specific example of a developer requesting a cloud resource, such as a database, with a certain level of permissions.

## Prerequisites

Before we begin, make sure you have:

- Access to your Port account
- Permissions to create and edit self service actions and automations
- A basic understanding of JSON and JQ expressions

## Creating the self service action

Let's start by creating a self service action for requesting permissions:

1. Navigate to the **Self-service** section in your Port dashboard.
2. Click on "+ Action" to create a new self service action.
3. Use the following example JSON structure for your action:

```json
{
  "identifier": "request_permissions",
  "title": "Request Database Access",
  "trigger": {
    "type": "self-service",

>     "operation": "CREATE",

Reviewer: Just realized that the action json is quite lengthy. Let's wrap in inside a clickable button tag like

```
 <details>
 <summary> Request Database Access (click to expand) </summary>
 json content
 </details>
```

<img width="1113" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-15 at 5 28 03 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6915baf5-f599-49a2-a1a4-7f88d28d1814">

    "userInputs": {
      "properties": {
        "permissions": {
          "type": "string",
          "title": "Permissions",
          "enum": [
            "ReadOnly",
            "ReadWrite"
          ],
          "enumColors": {
            "ReadOnly": "lightGray",
            "ReadWrite": "lightGray"
          }
        },
        "reason": {
          "type": "string",
          "title" : "Reason for Requesting Permission"
          }
      },
      "required": [],
      "order": []
    }
  },
  "invocationMethod": {
    "type": "SLACK",
    "url": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/xyz", //Replace this with your slack webhook url
    "agent": false,
    "synchronized": true,
    "method": "POST",
    "headers": {},
    "body": {

>       "text": "hello from Port :slightly_smiling_face:, a {user} from your organization has requested for access to a database. the reason{reason}"

Author: Should have seen this, thanks 😅 . Updating

      }
  },
  "requiredApproval": {
    "type": "ANY"
  },
  "approvalNotification": {
    "type": "email"
  }
}
```

This self service configuration does the following:

- Defines an action with the identifier "request_permissions"
- Sets up user inputs for selecting permission types (ReadOnly or ReadWrite)
- Configures a Slack webhook invocation method to notify about new requests
- Specifies that approval is required
- Sets up email notifications for approvals

## Setting up the automation

Now that we have our self service action, let's create an automation to automatically approve certain requests:

1. In the Port builder, click on **+ Automation**.
2. Use the following JSON structure for your automation:

```json
{
  "identifier": "auto-approve",
  "title": "Auto Approve Cloud Resource Access",
  "description": "Auto Approve",
  "trigger": {
    "type": "automation",
    "event": {
      "type": "RUN_CREATED",
      "actionIdentifier": "request_permissions"
    },
    "condition": {
      "type": "JQ",
      "expressions": [
        ".diff.after.properties.permissions == \"ReadOnly\""
      ],
      "combinator": "and"
    }
  },

>   "invocationMethod": {

Reviewer: Just realized that the action json is quite lengthy. Let's wrap in inside a clickable button tag like

```
 <details>
 <summary> Automation definition auto approve cloud resource (click to expand) </summary>
 json content
 </details>
```

---
displayed_sidebar: null
title: Automating self service action approval
description: Learn how to set up automated approvals for self service actions, improving efficiency and reducing manual overhead.
---

# Automate self-service action approvals

In this guide, we will walk you through the process of setting up an automated approval system for self service actions. We will use a specific example of a developer requesting a cloud resource, such as a database, with a certain level of permissions.

## Prerequisites

Before we begin, make sure you have:

- Access to your Port account.
- Permissions to create and edit self service actions and automations.

## Create the self-service action

Let's start by creating a self service action for requesting permissions:

> 1. Navigate to the [Self-service](https://app.getport.io/self-serve) section in your Port dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the [Self-service](https://app.getport.io/self-serve) page in your portal.
```

> 2. Click on "+ Action" to create a new self service action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click on `+ Action` to create a new self service action.
```

          "type": "string",
          "title" : "Reason for Requesting Permission"
          }
      },
      "required": [],
      "order": []
    }
  },
  "invocationMethod": {
    "type": "SLACK",
    "url": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/xyz", //Replace this with your slack webhook url
    "agent": false,
    "synchronized": true,
    "method": "POST",
    "headers": {},
    "body": {
      "text": "hello from Port :slightly_smiling_face:, {.trigger.by.user.email} from your organization has requested access to a database. The reason: {.payload.properties.reason}"
      }
  },
  "requiredApproval": {
    "type": "ANY"
  },
  "approvalNotification": {
    "type": "email"
  }
}
```
</details>

This self service configuration does the following:

- Defines an action with the identifier "request_permissions".
- Sets up user inputs for selecting permission types (ReadOnly or ReadWrite).
- Configures a Slack webhook invocation method to notify about new requests.
- Specifies that approval is required.
- Sets up email notifications for approvals.

## Set up the automation

Now that we have our self service action, let's create an automation that will approve certain requests:

> 1. In the [Automations page](https://app.getport.io/settings/automations), click on **+ Automation**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In the [Automations page](https://app.getport.io/settings/automations), click on `+ Automation`.
```

---
displayed_sidebar: null
title: Automating Self Service Action Approval
description: Learn how to set up automated approvals for Self-Service Actions, improving efficiency and reducing manual overhead.
---

# Automating Self Service Action Approvals

> In this guide, we'll walk you through the process of setting up an automated approval system for Self-Service Actions (SSAs). We'll use a specific example of a permissions request system that you can easily adapt to your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will walk you through the process of setting up an automated approval system for Self-Service Actions (SSAs). We will use a specific example of a developer requesting a cloud resource, such as a database, with a certain level of permissions.
```

## Prerequisites

Before we begin, make sure you have:

- Access to your Port account

> - Permissions to create and edit Self-Service Actions and Automations

Reviewer: replace all instances of Self-Service Actions to self service actions and Automations to automations

- A basic understanding of JSON and JQ expressions

## Creating the Self-Service Action

Let's start by creating a Self-Service Action for requesting permissions:

1. Navigate to the **Self-Service** section in your Port dashboard.
2. Click on "+ Action" to create a new SSA.
3. Use the following example JSON structure for your action:

```json
{
  "identifier": "request_permissions",

>   "title": "Self Service - Request Permissions",

Reviewer: change title to Request Database Access

  "trigger": {
    "type": "self-service",
    "operation": "CREATE",

>     "userInputs": {

Reviewer: add another string input for `reason` we want to understand the reason for requesting the permission

      "properties": {
        "permissions": {
          "type": "string",
          "title": "Permissions",
          "enum": [
            "ReadOnly",
            "ReadWrite"
          ],
          "enumColors": {
            "ReadOnly": "lightGray",
            "ReadWrite": "lightGray"
          }
        }
      },
      "required": [],
      "order": []
    }
  },
  "invocationMethod": {
    "type": "SLACK",

>     "url": "https://hooks.slack.com/services/xyz",

Reviewer: add a comment that they need to change the url of the slack hook to their own

    "agent": false,
    "synchronized": true,
    "method": "POST",
    "headers": {},
    "body": {

>       "text": "\nHello from Port :slightly_smiling_face:\n\n:white_circle:   Read more about Slack wehooks <https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks%7Chere.>\n\n:white_circle:   Read more about formating your message <https://api.slack.com/reference/surfaces/formatting%7Chere.>\n\nThis message was triggered by {{ .trigger.by.user.email }}"

Reviewer: Change the text of the body to someone more tailored to the guide: hello from Port, a {user} from your organization has requested for access to a database. the reason is {reason}

    }
  },
  "requiredApproval": {
    "type": "ANY"
  },
  "approvalNotification": {
    "type": "email"
  }
}
```

This SSA configuration does the following:

- Defines an action with the identifier "request_permissions"
- Sets up user inputs for selecting permission types (ReadOnly or ReadWrite)
- Configures a Slack webhook invocation method to notify about new requests
- Specifies that approval is required
- Sets up email notifications for approvals

## Setting Up the Automation

> Now that we have our SSA, let's create an automation to automatically approve certain requests:

Reviewer: use the full self service action instead of SSA

1. In the Port builder, click on **+ Automation**.
2. Use the following JSON structure for your automation:

```json
{
  "identifier": "auto-approve",

>   "title": "Auto Approve",

Reviewer: Auto Approve Cloud Resource Access

When the condition is met, it sends a PATCH request to Port's API to approve the action run.

## Customizing the Automation

You can customize the automation to fit your specific needs:

- **Modify the condition**: Change the JQ expression to check for different properties or values.
- **Add multiple conditions**: Use the combinator field to combine multiple expressions with "and" or "or" logic.
- **Customize the approval message**: Modify the description in the webhook body to provide more context.

## Best Practices

To ensure your automated approval system works smoothly and securely:

- **Match identifiers**: Ensure the `actionIdentifier` in the automation matches the identifier of your SSA (in this case, "request_permissions").
- **Thorough testing**: Test the automation with various inputs to ensure it only auto-approves intended requests.
- **Regular monitoring**: Set up alerts or periodic checks to ensure the system functions as expected.
- **Security measures**: Implement additional checks for sensitive operations, such as user role verification.
- **Documentation**: Keep your team informed about which actions are auto-approved and under what conditions.

> 

Reviewer: Guides are meant to be short so let's delete this section

:::tip
Remember to regularly review and update your automation rules as your processes evolve. This ensures your automated system remains efficient and secure.

> :::

Reviewer: delete

## Conclusion

> By leveraging Port's automation capabilities, we've created an efficient, secure workflow that reduces manual overhead for permission requests. This system streamlines the approval process for **ReadOnly** permissions while ensuring that **ReadWrite** requests still go through manual review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By leveraging Port's automation capabilities, we have created an efficient, secure workflow that reduces manual overhead for permission requests. This system streamlines the approval process for **ReadOnly** permissions while ensuring that **ReadWrite** requests still go through manual review.
```

> We're excited to see how you'll use this feature to improve your team's productivity and streamline your permission management processes!

Reviewer: the conclusion above is okay so let's remove this
